Defense Contracting in Saudi Arabia:

Launching Saudi Arabia's Military Manufacturing Sector
under Vision 2030

John M. B. Balouziyeh

I. Introduction

Saudi Arabia, a bedrock of stability in the Middle East, has in recent years been surrounded by
conflict and unrest. To the north, Iraq and Syria have descended into armed conflict, with substantial
portions of their territories having been occupied by insurgent groups. To the south, Yemen’s civil war
between the government and Houthi rebels has triggered the greatest humanitarian crisis on the Arabian
Peninsula. To the east, Saudi Arabia’s arch-rival Iran is laying the groundwork for acquiring nuclear
weapons. To the west, armed conflict in the Sudan has divided the nation, and piracy at the horn of
Africa has disrupted Saudi trade.

In light of conflict throughout the region and Saudi Arabia’s commitment to maintain stability within
its borders, the Kingdom has sought to build up a world-class military. Saudi Arabia recognizes that a
strong military is a key deterrent to growing threats to Saudi national security posed by ISIS across
Saudi Arabia’s northern border in Iraq and the threat posed by Iran-backed Houthi rebels across the
southern border. In response, the Saudi government has appropriated more than USD 50 billion in
defense spending in 2017 and over USD 55 billion in 2018.

Saudi Arabia has also begun aggressively partnering with the world’s leading defense contractors in
developing an indigenous defense manufacturing sector. Saudi Arabia's Vision 2030 and the National
Transformation Program 2020 present unprecedented opportunities to military contractors to invest in
Saudi Arabia. Crown Prince Muhammad bin Salman has committed to make Saudi Arabia, which is
currently a top-four military spender globally and the world's second largest importer of armaments and
other military supplies, a leader on the world stage and to localize over 50 percent of military equipment
spending by 2030. Led by the Crown Prince’s pioneering vision for a local military manufacturing
sector, the Saudi government is actively seeking partnerships with the world's leading defense, security
and technology firms. Vision 2030 offers these companies unprecedented investment opportunities in
Saudi Arabia.

II. Traditional Limitations

Traditionally, opportunities for military contractors in Saudi Arabia have been limited to the sale of
armaments and other military equipment to the government of Saudi Arabia and ancillary services
relating to those sales, such as:

- Maintenance, repair and overhaul (MRO);

- Training Saudi Arabia’s officers and enlisted on the operation of military equipment;
- Providing spare parts;

- Mounting and installing equipment;

- Technical support;
Defense Contracting in Saudi Arabia MEED
John M. B. Balouziyeh July 2018

 

- Fitting out military vehicles.
The sphere for military contractors has been further restricted by:

- Regulations prohibiting military contractors from engaging agents on a commission basis in sales
of armaments and military equipment to the Saudi Arabian government;

- Supreme Economic Council ban on foreign investment in manufacturing military equipment,
devices and uniforms.

III. Paradigm Shift

These restrictions are undertaking a shift with the introduction of Saudi Arabia's Vision 2030 and the
National Transformation Program 2020, which seek to incubate an indigenous military manufacturing
industry. Vision 2030 states in part:

AS we continue to give our army the best possible machinery and equipment, we plan to manufacture half of
our military needs within the Kingdom to create more job opportunities for citizens and keep more resources
in our country.

The benefits of localizing our own defense industries are not limited to solely reducing military spending. It
also stimulates other industrial sectors such as industrial equipment, communications and information
technology, which in turn creates more job opportunities. Although the Kingdom is the world’s third biggest
military spender, only 2 percent of this spending is within our Kingdom. The national defense industrial
sector is limited to only seven companies and two research centers.

Our aim is to localize over 50 percent of military equipment spending by 2030. We have already begun
developing less complex industries such as those providing spare parts, armored vehicles and basic
ammunition. We will expand this initiative to higher value and more complex equipment such as military
aircraft. We will build an integrated national network of services and supporting industries that will improve
our self-sufficiency and strengthen our defense exports, both regionally and internationally.

Localization will be achieved through direct investments and strategic partnerships with leading companies in
this sector. These moves will transfer knowledge and technology, and build national expertise in the fields of
manufacturing, maintenance, repair, research and development.

IV. Tensions

While Vision 2030 may not lift the ban on foreign investment in the military manufacturing industry,
it will without doubt bring other opportunities for partnership between the Saudi Arabian government
and the world’s leading and most innovating military contractors.

At the same time, however, there will be several tensions at play:

- The Supreme Economic Council has traditionally sought to limit foreign investment in the
military manufacturing sector. This restriction was not established with protectionism in mind.
After all, foreign investment is permitted in manufacturing of civilian goods and products.
Rather, the restriction aims to strengthen Saudi national security, since foreign control over
